# Projektseminar

# How does Labor Market Dualization shape Political Participation?
Revisiting the Resource Model of Political Participation in the Post-Industrial Era of Labor Market Insiders and Outsiders in Western Europe (2014–2018) 

Political inequality is usually examined through socio-economic status, while structural change has receded from debates on participation. This paper argues that postindustrial transition marked by labor market dualization introduces a new axes of inequality, dividing secure insiders from precarious outsiders with low bargaining power and social protection. Revisiting the resource model of political participation, we assume how dualization constrains outsiders' civic resources via weakened workplace as well as social integration and their material resources through reduced financial stability, fostering political withdrawal across conventional and unconventional channels, in contrast to insiders. Drawing on European Social Survey (2014–2018), EU-SILC (2014–2018), and ILO (2025) data, I capture labor market dualization as individual's labor market risk to unemployment and atypical employment, as well as status-based divide between employees with fixed-term and permanent contracts. With the help of logistic regression and fixed-effects models, the findings confirm theoretical expectations that labor market dualization matters for political participation, generating participation gaps between insiders and outsiders. Yet the effects to political inequality come with restrictions: outsiders are more prone to withdraw from both electoral and civic engagement, but once socioeconomic status is controlled for, the effect loses widely its independent explanatory power. As low income and class are itself characteristic of outsiders, the results point to the persistence of traditional inequalities, through which outsiderness channels political withdrawal. One unexpected result stands out: outsiders in fixed-term contracts participate more in conventional politics than insiders, suggesting that precarious employment may carry mobilization potential and electoral abstention operates as a compensatory form of silent protest, offset by civic engagement. Overall, labor market dualization brings back a economic dimension to political inequality, without eclipsing the importance of traditional SES, and calls for renewed attention to how structural change recalibrate the terms of political engagement.
